---
title: "Tight Times: Money Crisis In India Continues"
author: Ariana Pemberton
date: "2016-12-03T22:40:32.169Z"
archive: "December 2016"
region: Southx Asia
path: "/blog/tight-times-money-crisis-in-india-continues/"
---

According to The New Indian Express on Monday, November 28, India’s Prime Minister Modi has not done much for those going through great struggle because of the recent, abrupt and massive transition in the nation’s monetary system. For those who haven’t already heard, and to recap my last entry on this subject, on November 8 the Prime Minister made the bold move to demonetize all 500 and 1,000 rupee notes in attempt to rid the country of its ‘black money’. As a result, the country has been chaotic, to say the least, with a strict limit on ATM and bank withdrawals. Majority of day-to-day transactions in India rely on cash exchange, so this shortage on cash has majorly affected people’s daily lives.

Modi’s most recent response to the country’s upheaval, reported by The New Indian Express writer Narita Bajpai, is frankly a bit unsettling and unsympathetic to the billion-plus people that have been affected. He has announced that while he knew this transition would be extremely difficult for many people, it is his hope to let this transition be the first of necessary taken steps towards a less cash-dependent economy. He has encouraged Indian citizens to transition their daily expenses from cash to digital (ie. smartphone apps) with the comment, “It is as easy as sending a message on WhatsApp”. In an ideal world, yes, smartphone transactions replacing physical cash transactions would benefit society in a number of ways. However, I read his comment as rather elitist. It must be easy to make these kinds of suggestions when you probably have a personal assistant, a couple body guards, at least one iPhone for both personal and business purposes, WiFi practically wherever you go, and countless other privileges that most people are never exposed to. There are 1.3 billion people that live in India, and while a huge portion of the population do own smartphones with the ability to complete automatic transactions, the fact remains that smartphones (with data plans and accessible service) are a privilege that not all have constant personal access to.

Additionally, one must carefully consider the risks of transitioning to a majorly electronic economy. Big issue number one: fraud and identity theft. Dangerous security problems involving Venmo have already been revealed– someone finds out your username and password and all of a sudden they have access to your entire bank account without any extra verification. It’s easy and convenient and awesome, until you wake up to a $3,000 charge that already went through automatically (just read New York City’s Chris Grey’s story in Slate Magazine– link below). Of course fraud is a fixable problem for most when you can gripe to your bank until they reimburse you, but nonetheless it is a huge, unnecessary hassle that no one wants to experience, and is certainly more trying for some than for others.

Modi’s push for a “cashless society” is idyllic and I’m not sure if it’s been thought through thoroughly enough. While he recognizes that “[it] will not [be achieved] immediately”, there are still far too many circumstances in which this dream will have a negative impact on average daily lives. The millions of people who make a living off services paid by cash will be expected to have smartphones to make transactions eventually? Will all the beggars and people in dire need also need an electronic pay app if one chooses to help them? And I suppose when pious Hindu practitioners go to their temple they will be able to simply Venmo Krishna rather than leave a cash offering at his shrine. The many situations can get rather ridiculous, and to put the current issue at point blank, so is Modi’s aloof suggestion at this point in time.
